## What is Grippenet?<br>
Grippenet is a participatory surveillance system that contributes to the detection and surveillance of influenza-like-illnesses (ILIs) and COVID-19 in Switzerland. It aims to provide a better understanding of the transmission of these diseases. It is a project that was launched and implemented in Switzerland in 2016 in collaboration with the Institute of Global Health (ISG) of the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Geneva, the Laboratory of Computational Epidemiology (ISI, Turin), Computational Social Sciences (ETH, Zürich), the Laboratory of Digital Epidemiology (EPFL, Lausanne) and the National Reference Center for Influenza (HUG, Geneva). Grippenet is part of a larger scale project, Influenzanet, which is a European monitoring system introduced in 2003 initially by the Netherlands and Belgium and later ratified by ten other European countries, including Switzerland in 2016. Since March 2020, Grippenet.ch also contributes to the monitoring of the COVID-19 pandemic.

## How does Grippenet work?<br>

The concept is simple: First you sign up quickly and anonymously to the official Grippenet-Website. As a first-time user, you complete your profile by answering questions about your age, your current work status, etc. Then, in a second step, each week you report whether or not you experience any flu-like symptoms through a link that is sent to your email. If you happen to experience any flu-like symptoms, you will be asked additional questions about those symptoms. The entire weekly process takes about 30 seconds if you don’t experience any symptoms, and around 5 minutes if you do.  
Our project works to collect data which is not necessarily captured by the traditional surveillance conducted through the Sentinella network in Switzerland (in which general practitioners voluntarily report cases of flu symptoms). Thanks to the participation of our volunteers, we will be able to collect data on flu-like symptoms apart from the traditional input of doctors and hospitals, allowing real-time surveillance and monitoring of mild cases for which many patients do not necessarily seek medical consultations. The data collected will allow us, in association with the classical surveillance network, to monitor the epidemic of influenza and COVID-19. In addition to this, the data collected in Switzerland and in other Influenzanet countries will be analyzed in order to better understand the evolution and transmission of these viruses. By participating, you are contributing to the health of the general population and to public health research.


## Surveillance of the COVID-19 pandemic<br>

Seasonal influenza and COVID-19 have similar symptoms: fever, cough, fatigue and shortness of breath are all common symptoms of both diseases. Therefore, the monitoring of reported symptoms via the weekly questionnaires can be applied to the surveillance of the COVID-19 epidemic. Outside of the influenza season, any increase in so-called "flu-like" symptoms during this pandemic period is likely to be related to COVID-19 cases, allowing us to monitor the evolution of the pandemic. Your participation with Grippenet.ch will help us to better understand the extent of the pandemic. Similar to our data collection on ILIs, your participation will allow us to capture data on people who do not experience severe disease, and who are not necessarily seeking medical consultations. Many of these cases are likely to represent the majority of COVID-19 infections.
